---
layout: post-no-feature
title: "On PhD, Organized Education and Shipping"
description: "Software engineering is both an art and a science. You can't go to university and become Gauguin, Picasso or Yeezy."
comments: true
category: articles
--- 

The US has a great Black life tradition. Unfortunately, most outsiders are acquainted with only the negative aspects of Black american life. The often historical fear of blackness, and the american invention of black criminality as a cognitive balm to reconcile the evil of slavery and its on going progenies. Most outsiders don’t get to see the other side of that coin. They don’t get to see the strength of a people. They don’t get to see how black people have fought hard to maintain some form of filial bonds even when government sanctioned institutions fought to dehumanize them and rend their families apart. They don’t get to understand the transcendent joy of black music, black artistry, black writing and so forth. They don’t get to see the beauty of black life. I have lived that experience.

I have beheld the beauty of black life, that is why I am so intense about my love for us. This was what I was trying to share, to say I understand why you don’t get that. I understand why you don’t really stand for blackness, because you have not lived the black experience. There is no Black experience like that in Switzerland. His life’s path didn’t give him access to that kind of opportunity. He lived a different experience, that of the African immigrant in Europe. Surrounded by the splendor of an old empire, where you can’t see how black hands have shaped all that you see, because it hasn’t.

There is barely an major institution in this country of ours that has not being touched or shaped by the black experience. As I seat here in Washington DC, just a couple of block from 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, every thing my eyes see and touch, has been shaped by the black experience. Blackness has a rich and deep history here in the United States, that it can’t have in Europe. Black folks ain’t got no right to any European kingdom. While we have a right to this land here. It is this inherent right that is ours, that causes us to continually agitate for full freedom. In the last 40 years after the civil rights bills, we have sent a black man to the oval office. While his ascendancy has resurrected a lot of fears of dormant white supremacy. Nevertheless, it is progress. This is what I wanted to share with you.