---
layout: post-no-feature
title: "On Heart, Mind and Will"
description: "Until we get the heart, mind, and will to change, we don't. A company is not going to evolve its cultural DNA without the leadership of its founder."
comments: true
category: articles
---

I just finished reading Kentaro Toyama's tour de force on the misunderstood effects of tech for social good - [The Geek Heresy](http://geekheresy.org/). His basic thesis is technology alone is neither necessary nor even sufficient to bring about social change. Where technology has triumphed, there has always been people who had the heart, mind, and will to use tech to catalyze change. What often happens is that technology in and of itself just amplifies the underlying existing social structures. We all love to tout how technology is going to make the world a better place, how technology is going to radically transform the world. But according to Toyama, we are misguided and uninformed optimist who are doomed to fail at our task. 

It is rather ironic, that out of most industries, ours is among the least diverse in its workforce in the nation. We who march under the banner of "Technology is going to radically transform the world for the better." Not to pick on any one tech company in the valley because all of their performance on this issue is abysmal. But since they put the numbers out there, I will pick Facebook. In 2013, Facebook hired only 7 Black people. Only 7. That was it! Stop laughing Google, you are not doing any better either. How is it that we who have decided to change the world into a better place through technology can't seem to find a solution for equity in our own institutions? If we can't do this at home, what makes us think we can do this at scale?

> >I realized after reading Kentaro's book, that what we in the tech industry lack is the heart, and the will to solve this problem.

This is not a tech-bashing post. I am a technologist, I have worked at, and attended august institutions that I am criticizing. This was something that just baffled me to no end. Part of my professional responsibilities is to wrestle with these kinds of challenges and to determine how technology can be deployed to address it. 

I realized after reading Kentaro's book, that what we in the tech industry lack, what we who are founders, or aspiring founders lack is the heart, and the will to solve this problem. We already have the mind, that much we can own. But we lack the heart and the will to really change our industry.

Technical interviews are awkward and uncomfortable for most people. But for a historically under-represented candidate if done wrong, it can be completely dis-empowering, draining, and a bother-line emotional violation.

Diversity in tech has become the celeb cause du jour. The near absence of Women and\or, Black, Latino, Native American, and Pacific Islander employees has become the next gravy train. The media has latched on to this story and is going full throttle to use it to fuel their "Techies are douche bags trope." 

The employees of these companies, especially the mostly White and Asian male engineers are made to feel like the bad guys. They are told through media that they are basically racist and sexist, they are told that they are using their "evil" tech power to oppress everyone. The male White or Asian techie has basically become everyone's punching bag for all that is wrong with California, from gentrification, to income inequality, to racial inequality, to gender discrimination and so on. Its a bit much and rather reductive in my opinion. It brings to mind a line from Obi Wan "Only Siths deal in absolutes." Yeah, there are a few douchebags out there, but they shouldn't be used to define and judge an entire industry. The media and others don't realize that they are doing the same thing they accuse tech of, "stereotyping." I disgress, back to the matter at hand.

This charged environment is what minority candidates walk into. Everyone is on pins and needles. The engineers don't want to prove people right, but on the other hand they don't want to feel forced to bring in just any candidate as long as they fill some minority quota. It is both insulting to the candidate and degrading to the ideals of "meritocracy." [I firmly agree with this] All the old ideas around "affirmative action and the myth of Black inferiority" are awakened in them. What is worse, is that they might not even be consciously aware that all these is going on. They just think for some reason they just don't feel comfortable. 

On the side, the minority candidate starts to experience a classic case of "[stereotype threat](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/sats/interviews/steele.html)." They know they are being put through the microscope. They know that they have studied hard, they have prepared for this interview, they know they can nail it, but they also know that there is chance they will not be judged fairly, they are reminded of all the other times they were told to quit CS because people like them don't do it, they are even more jarred about their otherness when they walk on the company campus and don't see any one that even remotely looks like them. Whether they want to admit it or not, they are aware of the difference.  All this put a cognitive burden just to process, at the same time when they need to have their brain going full throttle, they are busy playing mental gymnastics. 

Both sides have come to the table charged and filled with their own individual biases. To make matters worse, software engineering is a rarefied craft that is best acquired through an apprenticeship model, which means great software engineers are not made at school but are made through experience. Our unfortunate candidate doesn't know this, neither do the engineers that will be interviewing them.

The engineers have forgotten that majority of what they know about our craft, they learned through experience, often on the job. To make matters worse, because some of the valley founders have come out of great institutions like Berkeley, Stanford, Harvard and so on -great computer science power houses, no doubt- they falsely believe that it is the education that they got in their CS departments that led the founders down the path to create companies with stellar engineering departments. Perhaps the CS education they got might have help sparked the idea that was their company, but it is not responsible for building enterprise level production software engineering departments. So everyone is under-informed and working off of a dated play book. 

Back to our interview. The interviewee is tested in a way they may have never before experienced, they are asked to white board their code. Who came up with that genius idea? They are asked to use a [think-a-loud protocol](https://books.google.com/books?id=znbkHaC8QeMC&pg=PA327&lpg=PA327&dq=Think+a+loud+method+newell+simon&source=bl&ots=a06SZZojrG&sig=DiCA5cLH0ch4V87jKrf1_KB8U0A&hl=en&sa=X&ei=BxmQVeTaIJP8oQTJhZLoCQ&ved=0CFAQ6AEwBw#v=onepage&q=Think%20a%20loud%20method%20newell%20simon&f=false) that came from Newell and Simon, in their studies of human cognition. An academic protocol that most people have never been trained to do. And to top it off, they are tested like a neophyte software engineer, when they have spent their last four years at a university that is designed to create computer scientist who will go on to graduate school. So, there is a massive mis-match in expectation on both side. Unfortunately, sometimes this is coupled with a "fixed mindset" on the part of the interviewer that may have bought into the myth of minority intellectual inferiority. The myth that says "the reason why you are not here is because you are not good enough". No one wants to admit that they feel this way, but research has shown that most of us suffer from implicit bias, and especially most of us find it more challenging associating positive traits to black people. (See [Implicit Bias Test](https://implicit.harvard.edu/implicit/) from Harvard and the damning results.)

Here is what it feels like on the side of the interviewee:<br>
1. It feels like you are on trial, and are being judged by a jury that excludes any of your peers.
2. You feel like you are being accused of a crime you have not committed.

Often these interviews test you through a series of meetings. Some contain technical problem solving via writing code on the board, others through Socratic technical inquiry to deduce your problem solving aptitude. The other meeting are to address culture fit, to see if you will work well with the team, if you will fit in and so on. 

Here in lies the major challenge, now you are asking a bunch of White and Asian men to judge let say a Latino woman to determine if she is smart enough and if she is will fit in with them. Until hiring decisions don't come down to this, it will be virtually impossible to achieve inclusion in tech.

Until we get the heart and will to change how technical interviews are done, we will not achieve inclusion. Until the founders of companies make this issue a personal cause, nothing will change. A company is not going to evolve its cultural DNA without the leadership of its founder. Lets us take a lesson from Toyama's book on the need for heart, mind, and will as a necessary pre-requisite for social change.
 

<small>
More on whiteboarding coding interviews:<br>
Why do we test people in conditions that are artificial? I have never written code without the use of a computer and Google. Knowing the syntax off head, has shit to do with problem solving. It's bother line irrelevant. Whiteboarding are the worst! Give people a problem, ask them to solve it the way they are used to, then ask them to justify their solution and improve it. That is a better way of assessing a candidates problem solving skill. At the end of the day, what is really needed is an assessment of computational thinking. A kid straight out of school is not going to be a good software engineer, heck, they are not even going to be a software engineer. They are going to be a computer scientist. This is why companies run onboarding boot camps to get them prepped to transition from computer scientist to software engineer.
</small>
